# IBMvista
Investigating Bose-Hubbard Model, variational insulator supefluid transition algorithm
## Files and folders description
* **VQE_scripts:** python scripts for the VQE algorithm. 
* **data:** data of selected VQE runs.
* **docs:** thesis text and slideshow.
## Summary
Quantum computers are a potentially powerful tool in the study of quantum many-body systems, achieving computations out of reach for their classical counterparts. Many purely quantum algorithms able to tackle physics problems with great accuracy have been proposed, but they still require resources beyond the limited hardware of current quantum computers. However, in recent years the development of a class of hybrid variational quantum-classical algorithms has already opened the possibility to employ this new technology in a variety of applications. This work focuses on the implementation of a Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE), finding the ground state of the two-site Bose-Hubbard model for different values of the boson interaction and low occupation numbers.

In the first chapter, the concept of quantum phase transitions is outlined, as well as giving a brief description of the second quantization formalism, which is used to write the Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonian. This model features a transition from a Mott insulator to a superfluid, caused by the interplay between competing terms of the Hamiltonian at different intensities, which is explained qualitatively. After describing some of the approaches used to compute its phase diagram, the discussion focuses on which quantum computational methods could be used to study or simulate this many-body system. An analysis of the simple two-site model follows, identifying two quantities, the entanglement entropy and the coherence visibility, which can be considered as a metric of the quantum correlations of the system, and will be used as reference values to be replicated by the quantum algorithm. 

The second chapter features an introduction to quantum computation and to the tools that will be employed in the implementation of a VQE.  After detailing qubits, gates and circuits, it presents the description of the services offered by IBM Quantum cloud platform, focusing on Qiskit and the systems, both hardware and simulators,  accessible by its users, then outlining their properties, limitations and possible error mitigation methods. The basic structure of a Variational Quantum Algorithm is explained, followed by the description of some of the ansatze and classical optimizers that are commonly used in VQE instances, one of the possible applications of these kinds of algorithms.

The third chapter details the process of studying the two-site model by means of a VQE instance, starting from how to represent a system of bosons in a set of qubits and the choice of the ansatz. At first, different encodings and ansatze are tested in ideal simulations of systems with two, three or four bosons, proving that they can perfectly replicate the result of the known solutions. Then, simulations featuring a realistic noise model show how much the current limits of quantum hardware can affect even relatively simple computations, such as these, requiring the introduction of error mitigation and post processing methods to partially recreate the system's correlation properties. Even so, the computed values remain largely dominated by systematic errors. For three bosons, a compact mapping and a simple ansatz that enforces the symmetry between sites obtain significantly better performances than the other tested combinations. This VQE instance is run on a real quantum computer, achieving qualitative correspondence with the values obtained by exact diagonalization. Considering numerical accuracy as a less than 5% deviation from the reference values with respect to the total excursion of the entanglement entropy, a quarter of the computed data satisfies this criterion. The results are commented in the concluding remarks, outlining a possible near-term extension of this approach to the simulation of systems with more sites.
